In a previous post, I announced plans to release an _alpha_ version of a complete system. I have a couple goals
for this release:

1. It's been almost exactly three months since the last time I released an exercise. Each release forces me
   to test deploying the system as a whole. I don't usually do this when I'm developing--instead I slowly
   add things on to my already-deployed infrastructure. This keeps the work moving forward, but it comes with
   a risk: that some of my iterative changes won't be deployable "from scratch" or that I've cut corners that
   will require rework. Doing a release is an opportunity to identify and correct any issues like that.
2. Once the code for the release comes together, I'd like to try to get five people besides me to deploy this
   system _and attempt to use it_. I'll re-evaluate this goal once the release code is complete; I'll only solicit
   volunteers if I really think the system can provide some usefulness to them as well as to me. But this goal
   remains important whether or not I'm able to achieve it in this version; if I can't demonstrate usefulness-to-others,
   at some point I'll need to move on to a different project.

Along with those goals, I have some _leniencies_--specific elements where I know more work is needed but release anyway.
This post is going to be a list of those places that I know about so far. In each case, I'm going to describe what is
left to do, the effect it will have on the system as a whole, and what the path to completing it might be.

1. **Lambda@Edge Log Groups**: Tha auth system creates some log groups dynamically. a "log group" is a collection
   of logs that are managed together in Cloudwatch, AWS's built-in log service. Because these log groups are created
   dynamically, they are not given an expiration date. That means that over time they'll build up in the account.
   The solution to this will be to write a lambda function that automatically sets expiration times on any autogenerated
   log groups. The auth system doesn't log much; over the past three months I've accumulated around 3MB of these logs--the size
   of a single uncompressed image from a nice phone camera.
2. **Image Management and Deletion**: As a part of my goal to enable blog posts, I've included code for uploading images,
   including them in posts, and publishing them along with the posts. However, I have not written a system for managing
   the images themselves. I'm also not sure if I'm going to fully implement publlished-image deletion before the alpha release;
   it may be the case that once published, images will be accessible via their direct URLs even if the relevant post is deleted.
   This will also mean that we spend more storage space on images than necessary. I don't think this inefficiency is enough
   to outweigh the value of the proof-of-concept. I also have some uncertainty about what "image management" should entail--for
   instance, neither Medium nor Instagram lets you manage pictures independently of posts. Not being a photo-album guy myself,
   I'm not sure how far to go in that direction, or if I could accurately anticipate how such a system should work. Open to
   suggestions. A lot of the invisible complexity of having a photo management system _and_ a post-management system is
   keeping track of interactions between the two--things like "if you want to delete an image through the image management system,
   but that image is being used in a blog post, how should that be communicated and what should happen?" These types of
   interactions can add a lot of unpleasant complexity if we're not careful.
3. **Theming System**: The theming system for the blog is underdeveloped. A "theming system" on a blog refers to the way that you customize the
   blog's appearance. I feel ok calling what I have a "theming system," because each post is generated from a template. But
   at this point the templates are deployed by terraform and not easily configurable. So for the alpha release, all the blogs
   will look like this blog.
4. **Trail link bugs**: I've noticed some bugs in the way the trail links at the bottom of each post are generated. I haven't
   made it a priority to fix them yet because I'm not sure how valuable those links are--in the logs, I don't see a lot
   of evidence that people are using them. But maybe people aren't using them because they're broken. In any case, that's
   more of a superficial thing, and I'm still focusing on foundations.
